Blog - Building a CLI Application With Argparse (#566)
earthly/website: blog/_posts/2023-07-27-cli-with-argparse.md

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
touch todo_cli.py
~~~

The above command will create a file named `todo_cli.py`. With the environment ready, you are going to have an application structure similar to the one below:

~~~{ caption=""}
todo_cli/
├── myenv/  # Virtual environment directory
├── todo_cli.py  # Main Python module for the CLI application
~~~

Now that you have set up the basic environment and file structure, you can start building the ToDo CLI application in the `todo_cli.py` module using the `argparse` module.

## Building the ToDo CLI Application

To learn how to use the `argparse` module, you will start by building an application that accepts just one command line option named `task`, whose value will be the description of the task to be added to a task list.
`argparse` is a standard Python module, so you don't need to install it separately. It comes bundled with Python and should be available for use on import.

Let's start by importing the `argparse` module; doing this will provide the various methods you will use for handling and parsing command line arguments.

~~~{.python caption="todo_cli.py"}

> # todo_cli.py

Reviewer: We can delete all of these since the caption has the file name

  task                  Description of the task.

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -p {low,medium,high}, --priority {low,medium,high}
                        Choose the priority of a task
  --due-date DUE_DATE   Task due date (YYYY-MM-DD)
~~~

The output shows the positional and optional arguments the `add` command takes and what each does.
These changes enhance your application, giving the user more commands, options, and different ways to work with them.

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
python todo_2_cli.py add "submit this article" \
--priority high --due-date 2023-05-20
~~~

This will give the following confirmation message:

~~~{ caption="Output"}
Added task: submit this article (Priority: high)
~~~

Using the `view` command with the `--filter` option:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
python todo_2_cli.py view --filter medium
~~~

This option will not return anything since no tasks are marked as priority medium.
Those new features give the user more choice and versatility in the ToDo application. By combining positional arguments, subcommands, and optional arguments, you can create a rich application that users can interact with in many ways.

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial, we covered the development of a ToDo CLI application using the `argparse` module. Here are the main points we discussed:
> 
> **Introduction to `argparse`**: We learned about the `argparse` module, which allows us to easily define and parse command-line arguments for our CLI application.
> 
> **Basic usage**: We explored the `basic` usage of `argparse`, including defining positional and optional arguments, parsing command-line arguments, and accessing the parsed values.
> 
> **Building the ToDo CLI**: We built a ToDo CLI application step by step, starting with defining the basic commands and their arguments, such as adding tasks and viewing tasks.
> 
> **Storing tasks**: We added functionality to store the tasks in a file using JSON serialization. This allowed us to persist the tasks between different runs of the application.
> **Advanced command-line arguments**: We introduced advanced argument concepts, such as marking tasks as done and removing tasks. We implemented the parsing and handling of these advanced arguments using `argparse`.
> 
> **Error handling and help messages**: We discussed error handling and how to customize error messages for missing or invalid arguments. We also explored how to display help messages to guide users.
> 
> **Choices in command-line arguments**: We learned about the concept of choices in command-line arguments and how to enforce valid values using `argparse`. We applied this to the priority argument for tasks.
> 
> **Enhancing the ToDo CLI**: We enhanced the ToDo CLI by adding features like sorting tasks, filtering tasks, and setting due dates. We used `argparse` to define and handle these new features and options.
> 
> Throughout the tutorial, we provided code examples and explanations to help you understand the concepts and implement the features in your CLI applications.
> 
> By following this tutorial, you should have understood how to develop command-line applications in Python using `argparse` and how to add various features and options to make your CLI applications more powerful and user-friendly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In this article, we covered the essential aspects of using `argparse` in Python CLI applications. We began by introducing `argparse` and its basic usage, including defining and parsing command-line arguments. Then, we built a ToDo CLI application, gradually adding features such as task storage, advanced arguments, error handling, and help messages.

We explored advanced argument concepts like choices, enabling us to enforce valid values for arguments. By leveraging `argparse`, we enhanced our ToDo CLI with features like sorting, such as marking tasks as done and removing tasks.

```
